---
layout: post
title:  "GeVI-SLAM: Gravity-Enhanced Stereo Visua Inertial SLAM for Underwater Robots"
date:   2025-10-16 23:46:07
categories: research
author: "Yuan Shen"
published: true
sidebar:  false
permalink: /gevi/
image: /img/posts/2025-10-16-gevi/1.png
title_image: None
link-new-tab: true
tags: Underwater SLAM, State Estimation
# hero_image: /img/posts/2025-04-10-rayfronts/rayfronts-teaser.gif
---

# Abstract

Accurate visual inertial simultaneous localization and mapping (VI SLAM) for underwater robots remains a significant challenge due to frequent visual degeneracy and insufficient inertial measurement unit (IMU) motion excitation. In this paper, we present GeVI-SLAM, a gravity-enhanced stereo VI SLAM system designed to address these issues. By leveraging the stereo camera's direct depth estimation ability, we eliminate the need to estimate scale during IMU initialization, enabling stable operation even under low acceleration dynamics. With precise gravity initialization, we decouple the pitch and roll from the pose estimation and solve a 4 degrees of freedom (DOF) Perspective-n-Point (PnP) problem for pose tracking. This allows the use of a minimal 3-point solver, which significantly reduces computational time to reject outliers within a Random Sample Consensus framework. We further propose a bias-eliminated 4-DOF PnP estimator with provable consistency, ensuring the relative pose converges to the true value as the feature number increases. To handle dynamic motion, we refine the full 6-DOF pose while jointly estimating the IMU covariance, enabling adaptive weighting of the gravity prior. Extensive experiments on simulated and real-world data demonstrate that GeVI-SLAM achieves higher accuracy and greater stability compared to state-of-the-art methods. 

**link:**[https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.24533](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2510.24533)

<div style="text-align: center; margin: 20px 0;">
  <video width="100%" height="auto" controls style="max-width: 640px;">
    <source src="/img/posts/2025-10-16-gevi/2.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
  </video>
</div>