---
layout: post
title:  "AquaPoint: Self-Supervised Cross-Domain Framework for Robust Underwater Local Features"
date:   2026-06-16 22:46:08
categories: research
author: "Boyong Zhao"
published: true
sidebar:  false
permalink: /ssw/
image: /img/posts/2026-06-16-ap/1.jpg
title_image: None
link-new-tab: true
tags: Underwater Robotics, Learning
---

# Abstract

Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is essential for autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs). However, severe hydro-optical scattering and non-linear geometric distortions frequently cause feature tracking failures in existing methods. To address this, we introduce AquaPoint, a self-supervised cross-domain framework tailored for robust underwater local feature extraction. Our framework comprises two cascaded modules. First, the Physics-Guided Domain Bridging (PGDB) module explicitly mitigates both photometric and structural domain gaps by synergizing physics-consistent hydro-optical degradation synthesis with OceanSim simulations. Second, to overcome ground truth scarcity and adapt to real-world hydro-optical dynamics, the Geometry-Consistent Descriptor Alignment (GCDA) module leverages air-calibrated intrinsics and multi-view geometric verification to mine verified pseudo-correspondences for contrastive learning. Evaluations on AQUALOC and FLSea demonstrate that AquaPoint consistently surpasses existing baselines, yielding superior absolute numbers of matches and inliers with denser spatial distributions. Furthermore, integrating AquaPoint into a decoupled pure-odometry ORB-SLAM3 configuration validates its trajectory tracking robustness, achieving 100\% trajectory completion ratio across Structure sequences and reducing the Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE) by up to 75.4\% compared to SuperPoint under pure-vision conditions.